PART 2: Revise GSEA pathway analysis notebook to use NB cell line results from RNA-seq (#427)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: pathway-analysis/02-gene_set_enrichment_analysis.Rmd

To refresh our memory, we analyzed data from [Harenza *et al.* (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.33) and specifically tested for DGE between with _MYCN_ amplified cell lines and non-amplified cell lines using `DESeq2`.
We have a table of results that contains our log2 fold changes and adjusted p-values.

> GSEA is a functional class scoring (FCS) approach to pathway analysis that was first introduced in [Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GSEA is a functional class scoring (FCS) approach to pathway analysis that was first introduced in [Subramanian _et al._ (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).
```

```{r input_files}
# DGE results
dge_results_file <- file.path(input_dir,
                             "NB-cell_DESeq_amplified_v_nonamplified_results.tsv")
```

#### Output files

```{r output_files}
# GSEA pathway-level scores and statistics
gsea_results_file <- file.path(output_dir,
                               "NB-cell_gsea_results.tsv")
```

## Gene Set Enrichment Analysis

_Adapted from [refine.bio examples](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/blob/33cdeff66d57f9fe8ee4fcb5156aea4ac2dce07f/03-rnaseq/pathway-analysis_rnaseq_02_gsea.Rmd)_

![](diagrams/subramanian_fig1.jpg)

**Figure 1. [Subramanian _et al._ (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).**

GSEA calculates a pathway-level metric, called an enrichment score (sometimes abbreviated as ES), by ranking genes by a gene-level statistic.
This score reflects whether or not a gene set or pathway is overrepresented at the top or bottom of the gene rankings ([Subramanian _et al._ 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)) 

> Specifically, genes are ranked from most positive to most negative based on their statistic and a running sum is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not.
> In this example, the enrichment score for a pathway is the running sum's maximum deviation from zero.

Reviewer: Here I am trying to make this a bit more clear, but I might be failing. 

One thing I am doing is not calling anything a "score" but the maximum deviation, because I think that was something that threw me off. I also just aesthetically didn't like the double "and".

Also, I wasn't sure about the phrase "In this example"; I deleted it because it seems like this would be true always (assuming you accept that the maximum deviation can be negative)? Or is there some aspect here I am still misunderstanding?

```suggestion
Specifically, all genes are ranked from most positive to most negative based on their statistic and a running sum is calculated:
Starting with the most highly ranked genes, the running sum increases for each gene in the pathway and decreases for each gene not in the pathway.
The enrichment score for a pathway is the running sum's maximum deviation from zero.
```

head(dge_results_df)
```

Since this data frame of DGE results includes gene symbols, we do not need to perform any kind of gene identifier conversion.
We do, however, need to check for duplicate gene symbols. 
We can accomplish this with `duplicated()`, which returns a logical vector (e.g., `TRUE` or `FALSE`).
The function `any()` will return `TRUE` if **any** value it is given `TRUE`.

```{r any_duplicated, live = TRUE}
any(duplicated(dge_results_df$gene_symbol))

> ```

Reviewer: Later you repeat this with `sum()` so why not just do that here and save a bit of duplication?

This will cause a problem when we go to run GSEA.
Let's talk more about the method itself to understand _why_.

> ## Gene Set Enrichment Analysis

Reviewer: I think this explanation should come before the duplication discovery. Placing it here makes it seem like the only reason you are explaining is to understand why duplicates cause trouble, but I think it is worth more than that! (I am sure you don't disagree.)

I think I would move this explanation of GSEA right to the top, followed by the gene sets, then by the duplicate removal. 

So my organization might look like this:
- Gene Set Enrichment Analysis Introduction
  - Gene sets
- Differential gene expression results
   - Removing Duplicates
   -  Pre-ranked list
-  Run GSEA

_Adapted from [refine.bio examples](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/blob/33cdeff66d57f9fe8ee4fcb5156aea4ac2dce07f/03-rnaseq/pathway-analysis_rnaseq_02_gsea.Rmd)_

![](diagrams/subramanian_fig1.jpg)

> **Figure 1. [Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Figure 1. [Subramanian _et al._ (2005)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102).**
```

GSEA calculates a pathway-level metric, called an enrichment score (sometimes abbreviated as ES), by ranking genes by a gene-level statistic.

> This score reflects whether or not a gene set or pathway is overrepresented at the top or bottom of the gene rankings ([Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This score reflects whether or not a gene set or pathway is overrepresented at the top or bottom of the gene rankings ([Subramanian _et al._ 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)) 
```

> Specifically, genes are ranked from most positive to most negative based on their statistic and a running sum is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not.

Reviewer: Running sum of what? Are we adding up the statistics or an indicator?

Author: I _believe_ in this particular implementation it will be the statistics, but will double check.

Author: Okay I remember why I don't get _into it_ here. I believe it's the absolute value of the ranked statistic scaled by the `sum(abs(< stats of genes in pathway>))` for the "hits" (addition) and then `1 / <number of genes outside the pathway>` for the "misses" (subtraction).  Which is not more helpful than the intuition about what the final score tells you about in my opinion?

Author: I rearranged the notebook (so this says outdated), but I left the sentence the way it is. Happy to take another go at it if you have suggestions!

In this example, the enrichment score for a pathway is the running sum's maximum deviation from zero.
GSEA also assesses statistical significance of the scores for each pathway through permutation testing. 

> As a result, each input pathway will have a p-value associated with it that is then corrected for multiple hypothesis testing ([Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, each input pathway will have a p-value associated with it that is then corrected for multiple hypothesis testing ([Subramanian _et al._ 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)).
```

The implementation of GSEA we use in here examples requires a gene list ordered by some statistic and input gene sets. 
When you use previously computed gene-level statistics with GSEA, it is called GSEA pre-ranked.

### Removing duplicates

The GSEA approach requires on discriminating between genes that are in a gene set and those that are not. 
Practically speaking, gene sets are just collections of gene identifiers!

> When the function we use for GSEA pre-ranked gets a list with duplicated gene identifiers, it can produce unexpected results.

Reviewer: Question for my own edification: If the algorithm can handle it, why not include both duplicate ids? Say one is up and the other is neutral... would it not be reasonable to include both as a way of "averaging" the effects?

Author: Thinking about this a bit more... (provided that having duplicate identifiers doesn't result in errors or strange choices under the hood) I'm not sure it would have the effect of "averaging" on the enrichment score _itself_ - you can imagine a situation where the neutral instance is not in the leading edge for a positive score, i.e., the other genes in the pathway are so overrepresented at the top of the list that the score has peaked before the value associated with the neutral instance gets added to the sum. The other thing that gives me pause is the permutation testing and NES score calculation. When the method selects random gene sets of equal sizes, what happens to the duplicate identifiers? (Are we selecting those by the number of unique gene identifiers?)

If I recall correctly, the GSEA implementations on GenePattern arbitrarily select one of the values associated with an identifier, which you can make an argument for here, too. (I would not be inclined to trust a result for an individual pathway that changed much between the arbitrary choice and the more extreme choice.)

Reviewer: Yeah, I wasn't expecting any kind fo real averaging... I think that if I am understanding you correctly, you are surmizing that leaving both in would be dominated by the larger score, which I think agrees with my intuition. And yes, it would be trouble for the permutation calculations to be sure.

But I also realized that the algorithm definitely can't handle duplicates in its current implementation: named vectors can't have duplicate names. So you do have to do _something_.

Let's use `duplicated()` again, this time with `sum()`, which will tell us how many duplicated gene symbols there are.

```{r how_many_duplicated, live = TRUE}
sum(duplicated(dge_results_df$gene_symbol))
```

> Compared to the total number of genes that are in our results, there are not a lot of duplicates but we'll still need to make a decision about how to handle them.

Reviewer: See earlier comment about reducing duplication here.

> Let's get a vector of the duplicated gene sysmbols so we can use it to explore our filtering steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's get a vector of the duplicated gene symbols so we can use it to explore our filtering steps.
```

```{r gene_dups, live = TRUE}
duplicated_gene_symbols <- dge_results_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(duplicated(gene_symbol)) %>%
  dplyr::pull(gene_symbol)
```

> Now we'll look at the values for the 

Reviewer: We are all competing for the "didn't write down the whole thought" crown.

```{r show_gene_dups}
dge_results_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol %in% duplicated_gene_symbols) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(gene_symbol)
```
We can see that the associated values vary for each row.

Let's keep the gene symbols associated with the higher absolute value of the log2 fold change.

> GSEA relies on genes' rankings on the basis of a gene-level statistic and the enrichment score that is calculated reflects the degree to which genes in a gene set are overrepresented in the top or bottom of the rankings ([Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GSEA relies on genes' rankings on the basis of a gene-level statistic and the enrichment score that is calculated reflects the degree to which genes in a gene set are overrepresented in the top or bottom of the rankings ([Subramanian _et al._ 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)).
```

Retaining the instance of the gene symbols with the higher absolute value of a gene-level statistic means that we will retain the value that is likely to be more highly- or lowly-ranked or, put another way, the values less likely to be towards the middle of the ranked gene list.
We should keep this decision in mind when interpreting our results.
For example, if all the duplicate identifiers happened to be in a particular gene set, we may get an overly optimistic view of how perturbed that gene set is because we preferentially selected instances of the identifier that have a higher absolute value of the statistic used for ranking.

> In the next chunk, we are going to filter out the duplicated row using the `dplyr::distinct()` function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next chunk, we are going to filter out the duplicated rows using the `dplyr::distinct()` function
```

This will keep the first row with the duplicated value thus keeping the row with the highest absolute value of the log2 fold change.

```{r filter_dge}
filtered_dge_df <- dge_results_df %>%
  # Sort so that the highest absolute values of the log2 fold change are at the
  # top
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(abs(log2FoldChange))) %>%
  # Filter out the duplicated rows using `dplyr::distinct()`
  dplyr::distinct(gene_symbol, .keep_all = TRUE)
```

Let's see what happened to our duplicate identifiers.

```{r show_filtered_dge, live = TRUE}
# Subset to & arrange by gene symbols that were duplicated in the original 
# data frame of results
filtered_dge_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol %in% duplicated_gene_symbols) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(gene_symbol)
```

Now we're ready to prep our pre-ranked list for GSEA.

### Pre-ranked list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked (sorted) named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.
This is step 1 -- gene-level statistics.

```{r lfc_vector}

> lfc_vector <- filtered_dge_df$log2FoldChange
> names(lfc_vector) <- filtered_dge_df$gene_symbol
> lfc_vector <- sort(lfc_vector, decreasing = TRUE)

Reviewer: Because I hate `names() <-` (and generally assigning to a function), I'll suggest doing this with a newish feature of `dplyr::pull()`

```suggestion
lfc_vector <- filtered_dge_df%>%
  dplyr::pull(log2FoldChange, names = gene_symbol)
lfc_vector <- sort(lfc_vector, decreasing = TRUE)
```

Could also do the following, but I don't know whether I would care one way or the other.
```
lfc_vector <- filtered_dge_df%>%
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(log2FoldChange)) %>%
  dplyr::pull(log2FoldChange, names = gene_symbol)
```

Author: The argument is `name`, which makes less sense to me than `names`, but this is a note for future me and future you when we get a somewhat cryptic error when we use `names`.

```

Let's look at the top ranked values.

```{r head_lfc, live = TRUE}
# Look at first entries of the log2 fold change vector
head(lfc_vector)
```

And the bottom of the list.

```{r tail_lfc, live = TRUE}
# Look at the last entries of the log2 fold change vector
tail(lfc_vector)
```

### Run GSEA

We can use the `GSEA()` function to perform GSEA with any generic set of gene sets, but there are several functions for using specific, commonly used gene sets (e.g., `gseKEGG()`).

```{r run_gsea}
gsea_results <- GSEA(geneList = lfc_vector,  # ordered ranked gene list
                     minGSSize = 25,  # minimum gene set size
                     maxGSSize = 500,  # maximum gene set set
                     pvalueCutoff = 0.05,
                     pAdjustMethod = "BH",  # correction for multiple hypothesis testing
                     TERM2GENE = dplyr::select(hs_hallmark_df,
                                               gs_name,
                                               gene_symbol))
```
The warning about ties means that there are multiple genes that have the same log2 fold change value. 
This percentage is small and unlikely to impact our results.

> A large number of ties might tell us there's something wrong with our DGE results ([Ballereau et al. 2018.](https://bioinformatics-core-shared-training.github.io/cruk-summer-school-2018/RNASeq2018/html/06_Gene_set_testing.nb.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A large number of ties might tell us there's something wrong with our DGE results ([Ballereau _et al._ 2018](https://bioinformatics-core-shared-training.github.io/cruk-summer-school-2018/RNASeq2018/html/06_Gene_set_testing.nb.html)).
```

```

This will cause a problem when we go to run GSEA.

### Removing duplicates

The GSEA approach requires on discriminating between genes that are in a gene set and those that are not. 
Practically speaking, gene sets are just collections of gene identifiers!
When the function we use for GSEA pre-ranked gets a list with duplicated gene identifiers, it can produce unexpected results.

Compared to the total number of genes that are in our results, there are not a lot of duplicates but we'll still need to make a decision about how to handle them.

Let's get a vector of the duplicated gene symbols so we can use it to explore our filtering steps.

```{r gene_dups, live = TRUE}
duplicated_gene_symbols <- dge_results_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(duplicated(gene_symbol)) %>%
  dplyr::pull(gene_symbol)
```

Now we'll look at the values for the the duplicated gene symbols.

```{r show_gene_dups}
dge_results_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol %in% duplicated_gene_symbols) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(gene_symbol)
```

We can see that the associated values vary for each row.

Let's keep the gene symbols associated with the higher absolute value of the log2 fold change.

> GSEA relies on genes' rankings on the basis of a gene-level statistic and the enrichment score that is calculated reflects the degree to which genes in a gene set are overrepresented in the top or bottom of the rankings ([Subramanian _et al._ 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Yu](http://yulab-smu.top/clusterProfiler-book/chapter2.html#gene-set-enrichment-analysis)).

Reviewer: I think we could lose this sentence, given the earlier explanation. (The rest of the explanation seems good to me.)

```suggestion
```

Retaining the instance of the gene symbols with the higher absolute value of a gene-level statistic means that we will retain the value that is likely to be more highly- or lowly-ranked or, put another way, the values less likely to be towards the middle of the ranked gene list.
We should keep this decision in mind when interpreting our results.
For example, if all the duplicate identifiers happened to be in a particular gene set, we may get an overly optimistic view of how perturbed that gene set is because we preferentially selected instances of the identifier that have a higher absolute value of the statistic used for ranking.

> In the next chunk, we are going to filter out the duplicated rows using the `dplyr::distinct()` function
> This will keep the first row with the duplicated value thus keeping the row with the highest absolute value of the log2 fold change.

Reviewer: Slight clarification (because a period was missing).
```suggestion
In the next chunk, we are going to filter out the duplicated rows using the `dplyr::distinct()` function after sorting by absolute value of the log2 fold change.
This will keep the first row with the duplicated value thus keeping the row with the largest absolute value.
```

```{r filter_dge}
filtered_dge_df <- dge_results_df %>%
  # Sort so that the highest absolute values of the log2 fold change are at the
  # top
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(abs(log2FoldChange))) %>%
  # Filter out the duplicated rows using `dplyr::distinct()`
  dplyr::distinct(gene_symbol, .keep_all = TRUE)
```

Let's see what happened to our duplicate identifiers.

```{r show_filtered_dge, live = TRUE}
# Subset to & arrange by gene symbols that were duplicated in the original 
# data frame of results
filtered_dge_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(gene_symbol %in% duplicated_gene_symbols) %>%
  dplyr::arrange(gene_symbol)
```

Now we're ready to prep our pre-ranked list for GSEA.

### Pre-ranked list

The `GSEA()` function takes a pre-ranked (sorted) named vector of statistics, where the names in the vector are gene identifiers.
This is step 1 -- gene-level statistics.

```{r lfc_vector}
lfc_vector <- filtered_dge_df %>%

>   dplyr::pull(log2FoldChange, name = gene_symbol)

Reviewer: This seemed worthy of a comment.
```suggestion
  # Extract a vector of `log2FoldChange` named by `gene_symbol`
  dplyr::pull(log2FoldChange, name = gene_symbol)
```

## Run GSEA

The enrichment score (ES) for a pathway, a pathway-level statistic, is calculated using our gene-level statistics.
Genes are ranked from most highly positive to most highly negative and weighting them according to their gene-level statistic.
A running score is calculated by starting with the most highly ranked genes and increasing the score when a gene is in the pathway and decreasing the score when a gene is not in the pathway.
The ES is the maximum deviation from zero.
Significance is assessed by generating a null distribution by sampling random gene sets of the same size and an FDR (false discovery rate) value is calculated to account for multiple hypothesis testing.
([Subramanian, Tamayo *et al.* 2005](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506580102); [Korotkevich, Sukhov, and Sergushichev. 2019](https://doi.org/10.1101/060012)).
Now for the analysis!

We can use the `GSEA()` function to perform GSEA with any generic set of gene sets, but there are several functions for using specific, commonly used gene sets (e.g., `gseKEGG()`).

```{r run_gsea}
gsea_results <- GSEA(geneList = lfc_vector,  # ordered ranked gene list

>                      nPerm = 1000,  # number of permutations

Reviewer: Just noted you took this out... is it the default, or are we just happy with the default?

Author: New version of `clusterProfiler` deprecated this argument (I think? at least it yells at you), and the default for `fgseaMultilevel` (what happens under the hood) is still 1000.

gsea_results@result %>% readr::write_tsv(gsea_results_file)
```

### Visualizing GSEA results

We can visualize GSEA results for individual pathways or gene sets using `enrichplot::gseaplot()`.

> Let's take a look at 3 different pathways -- one with a highly positive NES, one with a highly negative NES, and one that was not a significant result -- to get more insight into how ES are calculated.

Reviewer: Good change
